Zhou Yu came out of the tent to meet Jiang Gan, asking, "You've come all the way across the river, is it to act as a persuader for Cao Cao?"
Jiang Gan said, "I've come to renew old acquaintances." Zhou Yu did not believe him, and Jiang Gan was about to leave. Zhou Yu held Jiang Gan by the arm and said, "If not, why leave?" He then ordered a banquet to be set up and summoned the civil and military officials to meet Jiang Gan.
Zhou Yu said to all the generals, "Jiang Gan is my old classmate. Although he comes from the north of the river, he is not a persuader for Cao Cao. Today, we only talk about friendship, not military matters." After speaking, he handed his sword to Tai Shi Ci and instructed, "At today's banquet, we only talk about friendship. Anyone who brings up military matters will be executed without mercy." Hearing this, Jiang Gan did not dare to speak further.
Halfway through the drinking, Zhou Yu took Jiang Gan's hand and went for a walk outside the tent, allowing Jiang Gan to observe the military camp and the grain and fodder. He also said in his drunkenness, "A great man living in the world, when he meets a trustworthy lord, listens to and follows his words, shares weal and woe, even if the persuader's eloquence is sharp, how can he move my heart?" After speaking, he laughed heartily, which made Jiang Gan's face turn pale and he could not speak.
After a while of jesting, Zhou Yu invited Jiang Gan to sit down and drink again. He pointed to the generals and said to Jiang Gan, "These are all the heroes of our Jiangdong. Today's gathering can be called a gathering of heroes." After speaking, he pretended to be drunk, danced with a sword, and sang songs until late at night, then pulled Jiang Gan into the tent to sleep with him.
When Zhou Yu's snoring was loud, Jiang Gan got up and secretly looked at the documents on the table. There was a letter, which turned out to be written by Cai Mao and Zhang Yun to Zhou Yu. Jiang Gan quickly hid the letter in his sleeve, put out the light, and went to sleep again, but he was preoccupied and could not fall asleep.
At the fourth watch of the night, someone suddenly entered the tent and whispered, "Commander!" Zhou Yu got up in a hurry, went outside the tent with the visitor, and spoke in a low voice. Jiang Gan listened carefully, but he only heard two words: "Cai Mao and Zhang Yun said that they can't do it for the time being." The subsequent voice was too low to be heard clearly.
Jiang Gan thought to himself, if he doesn't run now, he won't be able to escape by dawn. So he fled back to the north of the river overnight, handed the letter to Cao Cao, and after reading it, Cao Cao was furious and immediately ordered Cai Mao and Zhang Yun to be executed. Only after the execution did he realize that he had fallen into Zhou Yu's trap and regretted it very much.
After learning that Cai Mao and Zhang Yun had been executed, Zhou Yu sent Lu Su to see Zhuge Liang to see if he knew the inside story. Zhuge Liang said, "With the death of Cai and Zhang, the Eastern Wu no longer needs to worry about Cao Cao's navy." Zhuge Liang advised Lu Su not to tell Zhou Yu what he said to avoid Zhou Yu trying to harm him again.
However, when Lu Su returned to the tent, he still reported this matter to Zhou Yu. The next day, Zhou Yu demanded that Zhuge Liang make 100,000 arrows within ten days, or he would be beheaded. Zhuge Liang said, "Three days will be enough." Zhou Yu secretly instructed Lu Su to delay the craftsmen so as to find an excuse to kill Zhuge Liang.
Zhuge Liang asked Lu Su to lend him twenty boats, thirty soldiers per boat, and prepare green cloth and dry grass on each boat. He would definitely deliver 100,000 arrows in three days, but he must not tell Zhou Yu, otherwise, he would not be able to complete the task. Lu Su agreed in a daze.
At midnight on the third day, a thick fog set in, and the fog on the river was even denser. Zhuge Liang invited Lu Su to take a boat to collect the arrows. He arranged twenty boats in a row, and when they were close to Cao's camp, he ordered the soldiers on the boats to beat the drums and shout loudly. Cao Cao, not knowing the situation, suspected an enemy invasion and ordered random arrow shots, all of which landed on the straw dummies. When the fog cleared, Zhuge Liang had already obtained more than 100,000 arrows.
Zhuge Liang returned to the camp to report his mission. Zhou Yu held a banquet to commend Zhuge Liang and said he had thought of a strategy to defeat Cao Cao and asked Zhuge Liang to make a decision for him. Zhuge Liang said, "Don't say it out loud, write it on the palm of your hand to see if it's the same." The two put their hands together, and when they looked at each other's hands, they both wrote the character "fire."
Cao Cao, who had fallen into the trap and lost the arrows, was very upset. His advisor Xun Yu suggested sending someone to pretend to surrender to Zhou Yu in order to defeat him. Cao Cao agreed and sent Cai Zhong and Cai He, the cousins of Cai Mao, to surrender to the Eastern Wu in disguise.
When Zhou Yu saw that the two did not bring their relatives to surrender, he determined that it was a false surrender and decided to use their plan against them. He kept the two, gave them a heavy reward, and assigned them to Gan Ning as the vanguard, telling Gan Ning to be careful.
That night, while Zhou Yu was in the tent, Huang Gai secretly came in and said he was willing to pretend to surrender to Cao Cao. The two discussed for a while before parting. The next day, when Zhou Yu held a meeting, Huang Gai loudly said he wanted to surrender to Cao Cao. Zhou Yu ordered Huang Gai to be beaten with a hundred sticks, which left Huang Gai's skin torn and bleeding.
Huang Gai's good friend Kan Ze knew that Huang Gai was using a ruse of self-inflicted injury and was deeply moved. He was willing to go to Cao's camp to deliver a false surrender letter.
Kan Ze disguised himself as a fisherman and went to Cao's camp to deliver the letter. Cao Cao did not believe him and wanted to execute Kan Ze. At the critical moment, someone brought a secret letter from Cai Zhong and Cai He to Cao Cao, who then believed him and let Kan Ze return to Jiangdong as an inside man.
However, Cao Cao was still not at ease and sent Jiang Gan across the river again to find out the truth.
When Zhou Yu knew that Jiang Gan was coming again, he was secretly pleased and said, "With this person's arrival, my plan will succeed." When Jiang Gan arrived, Zhou Yu put on a stern face and said, "You have let down an old classmate. Last time you stole my confidential letter and messed up my big deal. Today you come again, and there must be no good intentions." He then had Jiang Gan sent to a hermitage on the west mountain to rest for a few days. Jiang Gan had no choice but to comply.
Feeling troubled, Jiang Gan took a walk behind the hermitage when he suddenly heard someone playing the flute. After knocking on the door, he found out that it was Master Fengchu, Pang Tong, and asked why Pang Tong was living alone here. Pang Tong said that Zhou Yu was too narrow-minded and could not accommodate people, so he had to live in seclusion. Jiang Gan persuaded him to go to Cao Cao, and Pang Tong agreed. So the two crossed the river overnight and returned to Cao's camp.
When Cao Cao heard that Pang Tong had come, he personally went out of the tent to greet him and invited Pang Tong to inspect various places. Pang Tong praised Cao Cao's ingenious use of troops and also offered a strategy to Cao Cao, suggesting that the large and small warships be locked together with iron rings and a wooden board laid on top to solve the problem of the navy's discomfort from the tossing and turning. Cao Cao ordered it to be done immediately.
Pang Tong also said that he would go back to persuade the talents of Jiangdong to surrender and take the opportunity to bring out his family. Cao Cao agreed. As Pang Tong was about to cross the river, he was pulled by someone who said, "You are so bold. Huang Gai used the ruse of self-inflicted injury, Kan Ze sent a false surrender letter, and now you come to implement the chain-link strategy!" Pang Tong turned around and saw that it was his good friend Xu Shu. Xu Shu asked how to avoid the war disaster. Pang Tong then told a plan.
Xu Shu followed the plan and spread rumors in Cao's camp that Han Sui and Ma Teng from the Western Liang were leading troops to attack Xudu, and he was willing to lead troops to guard the San Pass. Cao Cao agreed, and Xu Shu was able to leave Cao's camp.
With the chain-linked ships and Xu Shu guarding the San Pass, it seemed that the Southern Expedition was about to succeed. Cao Cao was very pleased and gathered civil and military officials to drink on the ship. After several rounds of drinking, he mocked Zhou Yu, Liu Bei, and Zhuge Liang, and said that after he conquered the south, he would let the two Qiao sisters from Eastern Wu accompany him in his old age.
All the officials flattered him, and Cao Cao became even more complacent. He picked up a long spear, stood at the bow of the ship, and began to recite poetry, extremely joyful.
The next day, Cao Cao practiced the navy on the main ship. Cheng Yu and Xun Yu both said to Cao Cao, "Although the iron chain-linked ships have their advantages, if Dong Wu uses a fire attack, it will be difficult to avoid." After hearing this, Cao Cao laughed and said, "You don't know that a fire attack depends on the wind. It's winter now, and there's only the northwest wind. If Dong Wu wants to use a fire attack, wouldn't it be burning themselves with the northwest wind?"
Zhou Yu looked across the river, and at that moment, a strong wind blew, with a corner of the flag constantly brushing against Zhou Yu's face. Zhou Yu suddenly remembered that everything was ready except for the east wind, and he was so anxious that he fainted and lost consciousness.
Zhou Yu was bedridden, and Lu Su was very anxious and went to see Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang smiled slightly and said, "I know how to treat the commander's illness." Lu Su hurriedly asked him to see Zhou Yu.
When Zhou Yu saw Zhuge Liang arrive, he put on his clothes and sat on the bed. Zhuge Liang greeted him by saying, "I haven't seen you for a few days, and I didn't expect that the commander has fallen ill." Zhou Yu said, "People have unexpected fortunes and misfortunes, and it's hard to predict."
Zhuge Liang said with a smile, "There are unpredictable changes in the weather, how can people anticipate them?" Hearing this, Zhou Yu's face changed color. Zhuge Liang said that Zhou Yu's illness should be treated by smoothing the qi first, and Zhou Yu asked for a prescription to smooth the qi.
After asking everyone to leave, Zhuge Liang wrote sixteen characters on a piece of paper, "To defeat Cao Gong, a fire attack is necessary. Everything is ready, only the east wind is lacking." Zhou Yu asked how to get the east wind. Zhuge Liang asked Zhou Yu to build a Qixing Altar, and he would perform a ritual on the altar to borrow the southeast wind for three days to defeat Cao. Upon hearing this, Zhou Yu's illness was completely cured.
The Qixing Altar was built, and Zhuge Liang, with disheveled hair and barefoot, wearing a Taoist robe, began to borrow the east wind.
At the third watch, the southeast wind indeed blew.
Zhou Yu was delighted, but suddenly he thought of Zhuge Liang's extraordinary abilities and realized that he could not be kept around. He immediately sent Ding Feng and Xu Sheng to the Qixing Altar to kill Zhuge Liang. However, by the time they arrived, Zhuge Liang was already gone.
Ding Feng and Xu Sheng hurriedly chased after him along the river and saw Zhuge Liang standing at the stern of a boat from a distance. Seeing Xu Sheng chasing, Zhuge Liang shouted, "General, there's no need to chase. Go back and tell the commander to use his troops well. I anticipated that the commander would harm me, so I arranged for Zhao Yun to come and pick me up in advance." Xu Sheng continued to chase regardless.
Zhao Yun shot an arrow and severed the halyard of Xu Sheng's ship, then quickly left.
Ding Feng and Xu Sheng returned and reported what had happened. Zhou Yu was greatly shocked and said, "Zhuge Liang is so resourceful that it makes me uneasy day and night."
Zhuge Liang returned to Xiakou and immediately deployed troops and generals to block and attack Cao's army at various locations. Guan Yu, seeing that the military advisor had assigned others but left him out, asked why. Zhuge Liang said he was afraid that Guan Yu would let Cao Cao go. Guan Yu then made a military oath, and Zhuge Liang reluctantly agreed, sending him with Guan Ping and Zhou Cang to ambush at Huarong Trail.
Huang Gai prepared twenty fire ships, filled with reeds and dry firewood, soaked in fish oil, and covered with sulfur. At the third watch, he directly sailed towards Cao's camp. By the time Cao Cao realized what was happening, it was too late. Huang Gai's ships were set on fire, and the fire, aided by the wind, caused a massive conflagration as the twenty fire ships crashed into the water camp.
Gan Ning led an army, flying Cao's military banners, and set fire to Cao's grain depot in Wulin. Instantly, the fire on the water and the shore became one, and Cao Cao, trapped in the fire, led Zhang Liao and others to desperately flee towards Wulin.
Cao Cao fled to Wulin and saw the dangerous terrain and dense forest. He suddenly laughed towards the sky and said, "I'm not laughing at others, but at Zhou Yu and Zhuge Liang for not understanding strategy after all. If they had ambushed a force here first, it would have been formidable." Before he could finish speaking, Zhao Yun led his troops out, and Cao Cao was so frightened that he almost fell off his horse.
Cao Cao ordered his subordinates Xu Huang and Zhang He to hastily block Zhao Yun, while he himself managed to escape. When he fled to Hulukou, the soldiers and horses were so hungry that they could hardly move. Cao Cao ordered to bury the pots and cook food, and he laughed again, saying, "Zhou Yu and Zhuge Liang really have no strategy. If they had also ambushed a team of troops here, then we would not have been able to escape." Just as he finished speaking, Zhang Fei led his troops out.
The Cao soldiers, seeing Zhang Fei, were all terrified. Xu Chu rode his horse to fight Zhang Fei, and Zhang Liao and Xu Huang also joined the attack. Taking advantage of the situation, Cao Cao managed to escape. When they reached the crossroads, the scouts asked Cao Cao for directions. Cao Cao learned that the main road was flat and quiet, while the small road had several places with smoke, making it difficult to walk and hard to ambush. Cao Cao then ordered, "Take the small road."
After half a day, the road gradually leveled, and Cao Cao laughed again. His generals knew that Cao Cao was laughing at Zhuge Liang and Zhou Yu for their lack of strategy. Just as he spoke, a cannon fired, and Guan Yu led his troops to block the way.
The generals, tired and exhausted, could not fight any longer. The strategist Cheng Yu suggested that Cao Cao personally plead with Guan Yu, who might let Cao Cao's troops pass. Cao Cao thought it was the only way and reluctantly went to plead with Guan Yu. Guan Yu saw that the Cao soldiers were all disheveled and covered in mud, with tears streaming down their faces, and his heart softened. He sighed, turned around, and let them go.
Guan Yu suddenly remembered the military order and quickly turned his horse around, shouting, "Where do you think you're going?" The Cao soldiers, hearing this, were so frightened that they fell off their saddles and prostrated themselves on the ground, crying and worshipping. Guan Yu, after all, valued righteousness and let the Cao soldiers go.
After Cao Cao left the Huarong Trail and waited for Cao Ren to come to the rescue, there were only twenty-seven riders left. Cao Cao wept loudly, and his generals asked why he laughed during the escape but now cried instead. Cao Cao wiped his tears and said, "I am crying for Guo Jia. If Guo Jia were not dead, he would never have let me suffer such a great defeat." All the strategists felt ashamed and kept silent with red faces.
When Guan Yu let Cao Cao escape and returned to the camp, Zhuge Liang ordered the soldiers to seize Guan Yu and take him out to be executed. Liu Bei personally pleaded with the military advisor, stating that Guan Yu had performed many great services in the past and asked the advisor to spare him this time. Zhuge Liang had no choice but to be lenient with Guan Yu and spare him from death.